Home
Economy & Politics
Internet/Online Services
BookWatch
GET EMAIL ALERTS
Opinion: What Facebook and other tech leaders must do now to win back our trust

Published: Apr 9, 2018 5:20 a.m. ET

The tech industry is facing something of a crisis as Facebook has become embroiled in the Cambridge Analytica data breach and as self-driving cars begin making fatal errors.

Handled well, these issues will be just a mid-course correction, but they do pose potentially existential threats for Facebook FB, -1.34%  , Alphabet GOOGL, -2.20%  and other tech leaders if they fail to adopt new standards of privacy, ethics, and disclosure.

I do not believe that the Facebook issues in any way compromised the 2016 U.S. presidential election. It’s unclear whether Cambridge Analytica did much, if anything, for the Trump campaign. The efforts of the Russian troll operation were simply on too small a scale and occurred mostly after the election, or too far in advance of it, to be anything but an effort to increase existing divisions among Americans. Unfortunately, the messages they sent out were the same as anyone could find 24/7 on numerous cable channels. America has become more fractious all on its own.

‘Impressionable Elites’ are far removed from the actual problems of daily life
As I warn in my book “Microtrends Squared,” the elites of our society — those with the highest education and income — are becoming far more susceptible to adopting talking points from TV and newspaper columnists than fully understanding the facts behind issues.

These “Impressionable Elites” are far removed from the actual problems of daily life, such as obtaining health insurance, and are easily swayed by narratives and stories — they are the most believing of the Trump-Russia narrative, for example, and you can see, increasingly, how the financial markets are ruled less by the individual earnings of companies and more by storylines that often turn out to be completely false. Just two years ago, for example, financial markets were roiled by a belief that a China economic slowdown would take down the entire global economy — only there was no slowdown.

Data has become the new oil, and companies are drilling for it everywhere.
Many people seem to think that there is some kind of voodoo targeting that can magically and secretly change the minds of consumers or swing voters, much like the Force in “Star Wars”; in fact changing those minds is the result of massive campaigns operating right out in the open. Facebook and others charge so much for granular targeting that few advertisers are able to use them as their primary communications channel.


–– ADVERTISEMENT ––



But the exposure given to these issues has awakened users as to how commercialized their likes and dislikes have become. There are no free apps, no free digital assistants and no free searches. Even texts and emails are scanned and read for content on your interests.

Every digital activity is now monetized as data has become the new oil, and companies are drilling for it everywhere, and most of the time consumers are unaware that they are paying for these services with their privacy. To make it a fair bargain, new standards of disclosure in plain English need to be enacted so consumers understand what they are giving up and so companies can compete on privacy and security — which is only possible if consumers understand the differences.
